AUM AMRITESHVARYAI NAMAH
Swami Kaivalyanandaji’s Talks on Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 4, Part 59
Remembering the Guru Parampara, we begin our discussion on the Bhagavad
Gita, Chapter 4, Verse 18, in the bhàçyà.
Here, we are discussing about the part of ‘karmaåyakarma.’ The 18 éloka
said, ‘the wise person sees ‘akarma’ in ‘karma.’ When it says to see akarma in
karma, the word ‘karma’ refers to the activities of the body, the activity of the
mind, etc. – all of this is ‘karma.’ Even when this ‘karma’ happens in the mind
and body, that doesn’t take place in the Àtman, which is devoid of karma,
devoid of vibration and activity.
Even though karma is experienced in the worldly level, the Yogi sees, ‘in
the Supreme Truth, the Àtman is devoid of karma.’ Thus, the Karma yogi sees
the karma-less Àtman in karma. That is what is meant in seeing ‘akarma’ in
‘karma.’ Then the éloka also said, ‘akarmaåi ca karma yaã’ – the Yogi sees
‘karma’ in ‘akarma.’ There, ‘akarma’ refers to when an Ajñàni rejects karma,
sits and thinks, ‘I renounce karma. I am not doing karma.’ This person thinks,
and says this. In this experience of the Ajñàni, of the absence of karma, or in
his words, the Yogi sees ‘karma’ there, in this ‘akarma.’ He knows, even that
‘akarma’ is ‘karma.’ That is how the commentator explained this.
It says that this is known by a ‘buddhimàn,’ a wise person. What is the
first part said for? It will say later, ‘karmaåi abhipravätto’ – this means that the
way the karma yogi performs karma will be ‘abhi’ – with great enthusiasm and
interest, with great care. In this way, the karma yogi constantly is active in his
or her svadharma. There is no lack of enthusiasm or disinteredness in karma
for the Karma Yogi.
Even when the Karma Yogi is constantly engaged in action, the Karma
Yogi never leaves his remembrance of the Àtman. Still, it’s not enough to
remember the Àtman in any way or other. He remembers the Àtman as his
own true nature, his svarùpa. He remembers that that is devoid of karma.
th

Thus, in that ‘akarma,’ in the Àtman, devoid of all activity and vibration,
he experiences these vibrations. In that way, what is experienced is not Satyam,
not the Truth. He also understands that. That is another specialty of what
Éaåkaràchàrya says. It’s not enough to say that karma happens in the Àtman,
which is devoid of karma, devoid of activity. He says that the Yogi also knows
that in the Supreme Truth, these karmas don’t exist. The karma yogi also
knows that these karmas don’t happen in the paramàrtha, the Truth.
In other words, he knows, ‘these actions that I perform with interest and
enthusiasm do not exist in the supreme Truth.’ That is what the commentator
said. Then, he knows, ‘the experience of karma, that ‘I am acting,’ ‘I am
performing ‘karma,’ – he knows that this isn’t True. The experience is there,
but that experience isn’t the Truth.’ This is what the Karma Yogi knows. That
is to see ‘karma’ in ‘akarma.’
This means to know ‘in Truth, karma doesn’t exist.’ The Truth, or
paramàrtha is the Àtman, which is devoid of karma.’ Thus, the Yogi sees
‘akarma’ in ‘karma.’ That is ‘karmaåyakarma yaã paéyet.’ Similarly, it says,
‘akarmaåi ca karma yaã’ – this is to see ‘karma’ in ‘akarma.’ In the first part,
‘akarma’ referred to the Àtman. In the second part, ‘akarmaåi ca karma’ –
there, ‘akarma’ doesn’t refer to the Àtman. The second ‘akarma’ indicates the
renunciation of an Ajñàni.
When a person enters into karma yoga, this is his experience of the
absence of karma. That is the second meaning of ‘akarma.’ There, it doesn’t
mean the Àtman. This is the attitude, ‘I am not doing karma.’ Otherwise, this
is the thought of an ignorant Sanyassi. This is the thought of an ordinary
Sanyassi. What does a sanyassi think? ‘I renounce all of these karmas. Now I
have nothing I have to do. Now I reject karma.’ This is what a person thinks
out of Ajñàna, this absence of karma. That is what is called ‘akarma’ in the
second part. Thus, the second ‘akarma’ doesn’t refer to the Àtman.
That is ‘akarmaåi ca karma.’ In that akarma, in that absence of karma
that one imagines out of Ignorance, that one imposes in oneself, the Yogi
knows that as ‘karma’ as well. The Karma Yogi knows that. To say in a
different way, when the karma yogi doesn’t perform any karma.. if you want,
you can say that he is relaxing. Even when he isn’t doing anything, the Karma

Yogi recognizes, ‘I am in karma.’ In that way, ‘akarmaåi ca karma yaã.’ Why is
that? When one thinks by oneself, ‘I am not doing karma,’ that feeling is
related to oneself, to ones ego (ahanta). That kind of feeling is joined with one’s
ahanta, the ego. This knowing of one’s absence of karma, that feeling that is
joined to the ahanta, that resolve or thought, along with the activity of words
that takes place, all of that is ‘karma.’ Thus, that is not the ‘absence’ of karma.
The Yogi knows that even that is ‘karma.’
In other words, that is in the realm of karma, the ‘karma bhù.’ That is
what the commentator said. Because that avoiding of karma is in the realm of
karma, the person hasn’t overcome that realm. He hasn’t transcended that.
That is why when a person says he is a sanyassi, when he says, ‘I renounce!,’
this thinking is because of Ajñàna. That is what is said here. He doesn’t
renounce. Instead, what does he do? Even in that time, where he says, ‘I
renounce!,’ he is standing in karma itself.
Thus, it is saying clearly what sanyassa is here. We normally say, ‘I was a
brahmacari before, and now I am a sanyassi.’ What is that? This just means
that one went through some external customs, changed one’s dress, changed
the name, etc. That is how one becomes a sanyassi. What is all of this? All of
these things are sankalpas, all of this. We put new sankalpas in the place of the
old ones.
We change the old dress, and put on the new dress. So, that person
never becomes a sanyassi because of those sankalpas. A person doesn’t become
a sanyassi by putting on the ‘label’ of sanyassi. Then who is he? He is the same
person as before. Whether a brahmacari, or gähastha, that same person is
standing as a sanyassi. Not a single change took place. Why is that? Even there,
he has karma.
When we say, ‘he renounced,’ that itself is his karma. This renunciation
is a sankalpa. When he thinks, ‘I renounce karma!,’ that thinking itself is his
karma. So, ‘sanyassa’ is complete karma tyàga. How can there be perfect karma
tyàga? That is ‘akarmaåi ca karma.’ That is what is said second. In one’s
‘akarma,’ in that tyàga, he sees that karma. The discrimination that ‘that is
karma,’ is perfect sanyassa.

So, these are two things; in one’s karma, and in one’s absence of karma.
‘When I act, or when I don’t act, in both times, what does the viveki do? He
understands the Tattva, the principle of karma. We said before, ‘Gahaåà
karmaåo gatiã.’ How is that? It is that this karma and absence of karma are
imposed on the Àtman. In the Àtman, these two are equal. Whether one
thinks, ‘I am doing karma,’ or ‘I am not doing karma,’ both of these are
karma.’ The Yogi knows, ‘both of these are imposed in me.’ That is where we
stopped the previous day.
‘Yathà mägatäçåikàyàm udakaë éuktikàyàë và rajataë’ – there is the
experience of ‘I am doing karma.’ Just like that, there is the experience of ‘I
renounce karma.’ The karma yogi sees both of these equally. That is it. That is
what is said in the end. ‘Sa yogi,’ that karma yogi, ‘sa sanyassi,’ he is the
sanyassi.’ The Lord says later, ‘na niragnir na càkriyaã’ – a sanyassi is not a
person who says ‘I renounce karma,’ and doesn’t do any karma. He isn’t a
th
Yogi, nor is he a sanyassi.’ This is said in the 5 chapter.
Whoever has this viveka is a karma yogi. He is truly a sanyassi. That is
said later. ‘Ekaë yogaë ca sàëkhyaë ca, yaã paéyati sa paéyati’ – whoever sees
that Karma Yoga and Sanyassa, or Jñàna (Sàëkhya) are one, ultimately, he is
the one who truly knows.’ Then it says, ‘päthak bàlàã,’ what do the
indiscriminate say? ‘Sàëkhyayogau päthak’ – they say that these are two.
Ultimately, what are these? It says that karma yoga and karma sanyassa are one.
These aren’t two. Saying that these are two is indiscrimination. That is the
siddhànta of the Gita. That is also what is said here. It says to know, ‘both of
these are super-imposed.’ Both are equal; karma sanyassa and the performance
of karma. The Karma Yogi knows that both of these are imposed, and the
Tattvajñàni also knows.
In the perfection of that knowledge, these are one person, not two. That
is in the perfection of that knowledge. Then, where is it given the progression
of karma yoga, citta éuddha, jñànotpatti, etc.? That is in the beginning, that
these are separated. The Lord says, ‘yogàrùdhasya tasyaiva éama kàraåam
ucyate’ – that is said in the 6th chapter. It says that for ‘yogàrùdha,’ once one
has climbed in Yoga, then there is no difference. This is said for the beginning.

That is where it says, ‘one things is Yoga, and another is Sàëkhya.’ However,
ultimately, Yoga and Sàëkhya are one and the same. That is what is said.
Next it says in the bhàçya, ‘nanu karma karmaiva sarveçàë na kvacit
vyabhicarati’ – it says, ‘how can it say to see ‘karma’ in ‘akarma’? These are two
conflicting things. How can ‘karma’ become ‘akarma’? That is ‘karma eva
sarveçàë’ – wherever karma is seen, that is seen as karma only. That is never
seen as ‘akarma.’ ‘Na kvacit vyabhicarati,’ – that never changes in any place.
That karma never changes into ‘akarma.’ We never see that. Wherever
something is happening, don’t we see karma?’ It says, ‘tat na’ – no, that’s not
correct.
There are some places where karma becomes ‘akarma.’ Where is that?
‘Nausthasya nàvi gacchantyàë taâastheçu agatiçu nageçu pratikùlagati daréanàt.’
It says, ‘nausthasya’ – because in those day there were no trains or places, the
illustration uses a boat. A person is traveling in a boat. That is ‘nàvi
gacchantyàë,’ as the boat is moving fast, the person in that boat, ‘taâastheçu,’
in the shore, ‘agatiçu,’ the unmoving, ‘nageçu,’ in the trees, ‘pratikùlagati
daréanàâ,’ the person sees them going in the other direction.
So, as a person is traveling forward in a boat, he sees the trees moving in
the opposite direction. That is just like how we see in a train or bus. What is
that? That is like the éloka, ‘karmaåi akarma.’ The questioner said that karma
can only be karma. However, that isn’t like what we see in this. Here, because
the person is traveling in the boat, he feels that he is stationary. At the same
time, he sees that the trees are moving very fast. Thus, in that situation, there is
no karma, but he sees karma, isn’t it? There, he doesn’t see karma as karma.
Then there is another illustration. What are all these? This is to show that
something unmoving can be experienced as moving.
For example, when a person is in a stationed train, and the next train
moves fast, he feels that his train is moving. Then he feels that something that
is unmoving is moving. Then another illustration is shown. ‘ Dùreçu cakçuçà
asaënikäçâeçu gacchatsu gatyabhàvadaréanàt’ – then we sometimes have the
experience that something is unmoving, when it is really moving. When we
look at a train from far away, we feel that it is unmoving. Once it comes close,
we recognize that it is moving very fast.

Here, it gives an example. ‘Dùreçu cakçuçà asaënikäçâeçu’ – this is
something that isn’t in close contact with the eyes. This means that it is very far
away. Then when that object comes close to us, ‘ gacchatsu,’ it can be a horse,
or a person running, ‘gatyabhàvadaréanàt’ – but before, when that thing that
was approaching was coming from far away, he feels that it isn’t moving. That
is ‘gatyabhàvam.’ He doesn’t feel that that is moving. He feels that it is
motionless. Then when it comes close to him, he experiences that it is moving.
Thus, two illustrations were given. One shows that we can experience
movement in an object that is unmoving. That was the example of seeing the
trees moving past one. Then the next illustration showed how a moving object
can be seen as unmoving. That is when a vehicle coming fast towards us is far
away. Then we feel that it isn’t moving.
In this way, the Pùrva Pakça said, ‘wherever karma is seen, that is karma
only, not anything else.’ What does the Siddhànti say? He says, ‘that’s not so.
It is not that you can only see karma as karma.’ In other words, when we see
something to be moving when it is stationary, this means that what we see as
‘karma’ is really not. There’s no karma there, is there? Then, when we
experience something that is moving to be unmoving, do we see karma as
karma only? No. There, the person doesn’t recognize karma as karma.
Here, what is in both places for the person seeing? It is ‘ bhranti,’
confusion. He feels that there is karma where there is none. That is ‘ karmaåi
akarma yaã paéyet.’ Then the second part, a person feels that there is no karma,
where there is karma. That is ‘akarmaåi ca karma.’ There, there is karma, but
experiences that there is no karma. Thus, what is said here is the experience in
the world. Because that is a conflicting experience, ordinary people don’t
recognize that it is a conflicting experience. They will feel that it is true. Here,
this conflicting experience is called ‘bhranti,’ or confusion.
This is also what happens with the Àtman and the instruments connected
to the Àtman. These are the body, mind, etc. The constant activity of these is
the same as here. In truth, even though none of these movements are in the
Àtman, we sometimes feel there is movement. That is just like the person felt
the trees were moving. When those movements happen, when they become
subtle, one feels that there is no movement. How is that? That is just like how

we feel the person coming from far away isn’t moving. That also happens. That
is what is said here.
‘Evaë ihàpi akarmaåi ahaëkaromìti karmadaréanaë karmaåi ca
akarmadaréanaë viparìtadaréanaë.’ The commentator made clear this
backwards knowledge, or ‘viparìta daréanam,’ in the two examples. This
backwards knowledge is what happens in the jiva at all times. This happens in
oneself. ‘Ihàpi,’ in this jiva, ‘akarmaåi ‘ahaë karomìti’ karmadaréanam’ – ‘in
the Supreme Truth, the Atman the embodiment of ‘akarma,’ devoid of
vibration. However, a person feels ‘I am doing.’
This is our experience here. Someone else doesn’t teach this to us. ‘I am
doing.’ ‘I am doing this action.’ ‘I am thinking,’ ‘I am saying,’ ‘I am acting.’ In
this way, ‘karma daréanam’ – this is the experience of karma. This is an
imposition, ‘bhranti,’ or confusion. Then one who recognizes this is
‘buddhimàn,’ wise.
Like that, ‘karmaåi ca akarmadaréanaë.’ We said before, ‘cakçuçà
asaënikäçâeçu’ – this means that the object isn’t near the eyes. When a person
approaches from far away from the eye, we feel that he isn’t moving. Like that,
‘karmaåi ca akarmadaréanam’ – If we leave aside gross karmas, and only have
mental karmas, how is that? ‘I’m not doing anything. I’m relaxing.’ ‘I don’t
have any action. I renounce karma.’ When this is said, there are only subtle
mental movements. That is karma. But what does one do? ‘Akarma daréanam’
– he thinks that that is ‘akarma.’
This means that he thinks, ‘this isn’t karma.’ There, a person thinks
‘sanyassa is not karma.’ He doesn’t consider that renunciation as ‘karma.’ He
goes and thinks this. What is that? Because he experiences what happens as the
opposite of what it really is, it says, ‘viparìta daréanam’ – that is a backwards
experience.
‘Yena tanniràkaraåàrtham ucyate ‘karmaåyakarma yaã paéyte’ ityàdi.’
Therefore, this backwards knowledge (viparìta daréanam) is experienced in all
jivas. That is ‘bhranti,’ confusion. This ‘bhranti’ itself is our worldly
experiences. When we say ‘worldly experiences,’ this means the actions through
thought, word, and action. That is called ‘vyavahàra’ in Advaita éàstra.

Then what are our thoughts, words, and actions? Their existence depends
on this confusion, or ‘bhranti.’ There is no ‘vyavahàra’ that depends on Truth.
That depends on Asatya, Untruth. However, we experience that as if it were
Satyam, or Real. That is it is said, ‘worldly truth,’ or ‘vyavahàrika satyam.’ In
the level of experience, that is felt to be real. That is called ‘vyavahàrika satyam,’
or worldly truth. That is the experience of ‘bhrama,’ confusion. That is ‘ bhranti
daréanam.’
‘Tanniràkaraåàrtham’ – for discarding that, for refuting that, for showing
the jiva, ‘this is not Real,’ ‘ucyate,’ the Lord speaks. What is that?
‘Karmaåyakarma yaã paéyet, akarmaåi ca karma yaã’ – whoever sees ‘akarma’
in karma, and karma in ‘akarma,’ ‘saã buddhimàn manuçyeçu,’ he is Wise.
That is the Siddhànta. Here, the ideas of the éloka are made clear by the
commentator. Then, it goes to the Pùrva Pakça of this next. Then this is
explained in another way, in different ways. This is entering into how
Vättikàran and others commented on this before Éaåkara.
‘Tadetat uktaprativacanamapi asakät atyantaviparìta daréanabhàvitatayà
momuhyamàno lokaã érutamapi asakät tattvaë vismäty vismätya
mithyàprasanìgaë avatàryàvatàrya codayati iti punaã punaã uttaramàha
bhagavàn durvijñeyatvaë ca àlakçya vastunaã.’
‘Avyaktoyam acintyoyam’ ‘na jàyate mriyate’ ityàdinà àtmani
karmàbhàvaã érutismätinyàyaprasiddhaã uktaã vakçyamàåaéca.’
Here, the commentator says that this éloka said by the Lord is what is first
said by the Lord in the Gita. This matter was said numerous times before. This
isn’t a new subject. The things that are going to be are also not new subjects.
This is the same thing. That is said, ‘ tadetat uktaprativacanam api,’ even though
the Lord gave instructions to Arjuna as a reply to his questions, and on His
own as well.. These questions and answers have already been discussed. Still, it
has to be said again. When this repeats again like this, the listener will feel
some boredom. However, there is only one thing to repeat. There is no second
thing to say. Truth is only one. Thus, the Lord has to say that again.
That is ‘asakät,’ numerous times, the Lord said this. ‘Uktaprativacanam
api asakät’ – these questions and answers have been gone through several times

already. This is the Pùrva Pakça and the Samàdhana, the reply. Still, ‘atyanta
viparìta daréana bhàvitatayà’ BREAK –30:00
‘Momuhyamàno lokaã érutamapi asakät tattvaë vismätya vismätya
mithyàprasanìgaë avatàryàvatàrya.’ It says, ‘mithyàprasanìgaë,’ that false
samskàäa, ‘avatàrya avatàrya,’ have raised that again and again. Having
presented that again and again.. That samskàra of confusion (bhranti) that is
sleeping within, having again raised that from within, ‘codayti,’ Arjuna again
asks. ‘What is that? How does that happen?’ That is something that was heard.
It is something that was heard and understood. However, one can only forget
something one has heard. You can’t forget something you’ve never heard.
Thus, the person hears, knows, then, ‘vismätya vismätya,’ this repeats again and
again.
This repeats in each and every birth. In that way, one forgets again and
again. He doesn’t just forget. What does he do again? He gains interest in the
mind again (jijñàsa). Why is that? It is because there is the samskàra of having
heard this. There is also the samskàra of ‘bhranti,’ this confusion. With that
samskàra, what does he do? ‘Avatàrya avatàrya,’ – that samskàra arises again.
Thus, there are two; the samskàra of ‘bhranti,’ and the samskàra of ‘jijñàsa,’ or
the samskàra of ‘tattvajñàna.’ Both of these cannot be together.
‘Codayati iti punaã punaã uttaramàha bhagavàn’ – the person asks again
and again, through births and births. What does Bhagavàn do? In each birth,
he incarnates, and ‘uttaram àha’ – He constantly answers. This is called
samsàra. This is the flow of these questions and answers. Because of Ajñàna,
this jiva has to hear this again and again in each life. Again he has to forget,
then again has to ask. That is why the Lord has come again and again in each
birth, and has to give the answer. This is the depiction of samsàra. Therefore,
because of the firmness of the listener’s false samskàra, the Lord has to come
before him again to tell this.
That isn’t the fault of the one asking. Why is that? ‘Durvijñeyatvaë ca
àlakçya vastunaã’ – what does the Lord think? This is ‘ durvijñeyatvam’ – this is
something that is indeed difficult to grasp. ‘Àlakçya,’ having thought of that,
‘vastunaã,’ of this Paramàtma vastu, the Reality, ‘durvijñeyatvam’ – after the

Lord thought, ‘this is difficult to grasp,’ what does He do? He instructs this to
him again and again.
‘Avyaktoyam acintyoyam,’ ‘na jàyate mriyate’ ityàdinà.’ Through this
section, the subject of this part of the Gita was told. What is that? ‘Àtmani
karmàbhàvaã’ – this is the Paramàrtha Tattva, the Supreme Truth. This is
‘karma abhàvam.’ This means that this ‘confusion,’ or ‘bhranti’ of karma
doesn’t really exist in the Àtman, in Truth.’
When the Lord says this, as an Avatar, as a human being, this isn’t His
merely His opinion. This is ‘érutismätinyàya prasiddhaã’ – this is agreed on by
the Vedas. This is also agreed by the other works like the Smätis. Then what?
‘Nyàya prasiddhaã,’ having left all of these éàstras, even if one depends on
mere logic, there this is also agreeable. ‘Ukto vakçyamàåaéca’ – this refers to
what was said before, and ‘vakçyamàåaéca’ – what is going to be said as well. It
is this same matter that is instructed.
For the Tattva, the Truth, there is only one thing to instruct. For things
that are ‘mithyà,’ there are many things to instruct, because that is where
plurality is. However, for the Tattva, whatever those sages before said is what
those now say, and what is will be said by those to come. No one is expressing
anything new about that Tattva.
It is true that people can present many new and different things about
Untruth. However, nobody can express anything about Truth. That is that
alone. That is ‘uktaã vakçyamàåaéca.’ That is what the Lord said before, and
what He is going to say is that alone.
Therefore, this is said in order to avoid such a doubt. ‘Why is it saying
this matter again?’ To prevent that this is said. ‘Tasmin àtmani karmàbhàve
akarmaåi karmaviparìtadaréanaë atyantanirùáhaë.’ It says, ‘tasmin àtmani,’ in
this Paramàtma that was explained, ‘karmàbhàve akarmaåi,’ in that, there is no
karma. The svarùpa, or true nature of the Àtman is ‘akarma.’ Then in that,
‘karma viparìtadaréanam’ – this confusion that ‘there is karma there,’
‘atyantanirùáham’ – that is sentence 35:00.
Therefore, for removing that confusion, the Lord instructs again and
again. That is the meaning of what is said. ‘Yataã,’ why is that? ‘Kië karma
kimakarmeti kavayopyatra mohitàã’ – the Lord said, ‘kavayo.’ The word ‘kavi’

means ‘krànti daréi,’ those who have discrimination. Thus, even they are
ignorant about this mater. What is that? ‘Kië karma kimakarmeti’ – What is
karma? What is akarma?’ Here, we have already said this; ‘what is karma?’ and
‘what is akarma?’ What is it to see akarma in karma?’ ‘What is it to see karma
in akarma?’
Without understanding this Tattva, even Kavis, even vivekis are
‘mohitàã,’ they are deluded in this subject. How are they deluded? What is
there experience of delusion? ‘Dehàdyàérayaë karma àtmanyadhyàropya’ – this
body, etc., and these karmas that depend on these, ‘àtmani adhyàropya,’ he
imposes this in his own self. He imagines all of this in his true nature, and
thinks, ‘ahaë kartà,’ ‘I am the doer. I am acting.’ ‘Mama etat karma,’ ‘this is
my action. ‘Mayà asya karmaåaã phalaë bhoktavyaë’ – ‘I am acting now, and
must experience the fruit of this.’ ‘Iti ca.’
Likewise, it says, ‘ahaë tùçåìë bhavàmi, yena ahaë niràyàsaã’ In the
other case, one thinks, ‘ahaë tùçåìë bhavàëi’ – ‘I am motionless.’ ‘I am a
sanyassi.’ ‘Yena ahaë niràyàsaã’ – ‘now I don’t have to do anything with
effort. Now I can enjoy the pleasure of renouncing karma and sit.’ This is the
sukham of not doing any action. That is pleasure from ‘karma tyàga’ that
everyone desires, to be without any efforts. ‘Akarma.’
‘Now I don’t have to do anything. I don’t have to do any action, with
mind or body. ‘I am experiencing the sukham of having renounced that
karma.’ This is the pleasure of not doing any work. He thinks, ‘I am
experiencing that sukham.’ Through this lack of viveka, the sanyassi is also in
‘bhrama,’ delusion. Such a sanyassi becomes a slave to delusion, and rejects
karma. That is just like Arjuna.
What did Arjuna do? He renounced karma and sat in the chariot, as a
sanyassi. For this, ‘iti kàrya karaåàérayaë vyàpàroparamaë’ – this is the
‘uparamam, or cessation of the vyàpàras, the activities of both ‘kàrya’ and
‘karaåam.’ Here, the ‘kàryam’ is the body, and ‘karaåam’ is the mind, intellect,
organs of action, etc. These are all called ‘karaåas.’ For these, ‘uparamam’ –
this is absence of action. ‘Tat kätaë sukhitvaë’ – what happens from that?
From that, ‘sukham,’ or pleasure is experienced. That is the pleasure one has
from not doing any work. Such a person thinks, ‘this is paramànanda’ –

Supreme Bliss!’ For that pleasure, ‘àtmani adhyàropya,’ he super-imposes this
in his own self.
All the brahmacaris have a big desire to become a ‘swàmi.’ Then they
won’t have to do any work. Then it’s enough to assign others to do. Then we
don’t have to do. This is because one is anxious for that sukham, that pleasure.
‘Àtmani adhyàropya’ – such a person imposes that pleasure, he imagines it, in
his self. ‘Na karomi kiëcit’ – ‘now I don’t have anything I have to do. I am not
doing anything.’ ‘Tùçåìë sukhamàse’ – I am very happy, not doing anything.’
Iti abhimanyate lokaã’ – this is how all jivas have pride. What is this pride, this
abhimànam?
We said before, ‘viparìta daréana bhàvam’ – that happens because of the
samskàra of ‘viparìta jñàna,’ or backwards knowledge. That is caused from
Ajñàna. Without recognizing any of this, a person feels proud in being a
sanyassi. ‘Tatra idaë lokasya viparìtadaréana apanayàya àha bhagavàn
‘karmaåyakarma yaã paéyet.’
It says, ‘tatra,’ with this being so.. with this being the state of the jiva,
‘idaë lokasya viparìta daréanam’ – this backwards knowledge is in all jivas. For
that, ‘apanayàya,’ for removing that wrong knowledge, ‘àha bhagavàn,’ the Lord
speaks, ‘karmaåyakarma yaã paéyet,’ etc.
Here, it says clearly what sanyassa is not. However, people aren’t ready to
understand this. That is how all sanyassis are. Sanyassa is very easy to take. Just
put on ochre, then shave your head, or put some mark on your forehead. Then
with a rudrakça màla, if you sentence 41:00. What an easy job! Who is the one
who brought forth this being a ‘Swàmi,’ who spread this? It is Éaåkaràchàrya.
These people have never understood the principle said here by Éaåkaràchàrya.
42:00/ That is the greatest tragedy.
If such a person gets an opportunity, he will try to show that he has more
intelligence than Éaåkaràchàrya. They will say, ‘Éaåkara shows some ignorance
in some sections.’ However, they never understand what he says about
sanyassa, or about karma. They don’t understand this. This is a common way
of thinking in sanyassis. What is that? ‘Once one is a sanyassi, then you don’t
have to do anything.’ Once one comes to the àéram, the goal is to quickly
become a sanyassi. Once you’re a sanyassi, then you’ll be happy. That is ‘karma

tyàga.’ ‘Let the gähasthas and brahmacaris do karma yoga. They are all
ignorant. That is their work. We are not ignorant, so we don’t have to do any
work.’
All àérams are like this. All sanyassis are like this. They have never tried
to understand what Éaåkaràchàrya really said. Still, they have the pride that
they are in the parampara of Éaåkaràchàrya. In the name of Éaåkaràchàrya,
they have pride in sanyassa. They have pride in that lineage. ‘Tatra idaë
lokasya viparìtadaréanam’ – this sanyassa is backwards knowledge. This is why
sanyassa has had a downfall. This is why this entire tradition of sansyassa has
fallen. Why is that? It is because they don’t understand Éaåkaràchàrya’s vision
of sanyassa. They don’t even try to understand. If one can be a sanyassi without
understanding this, without trying to understand, then what is the use of
understanding? That is what all sanyassis think.
‘If we can become sanyassis without this, then why should we go through
that difficulty?’ For that, ‘apanayàya,’ for removing that deluded knowledge,
‘àha bhagavàn,’ the Lord says here, ‘karmaåi akarma yaã paéyet,’ ‘whoever sees
akarma in karma,’ etc. Then the bhàçya continues.
‘Tatra ca karma karma eva sat kàryakaraåàérayaë karma rahite avikriye
àtmani sarvaiã adhyastaë yataã paåáitopi ‘ahaë karomi’ iti manyate.’ It says,
‘karma karmaiva sat’ – karma is karma itself. Nobody can change karma, the
nature of karma. How is this? ‘Kàryakaraåàérayam’ – that depends on the
‘kàryas’ and ‘karaåas.’ The body is ‘kàrya’ and the ‘karaåas’ are the organs of
action, the organs of knowledge, the mind. Depending on all of these, ‘karma
rahite avikriye àtmani’ – in one’s Self, which is truly without any vibration,
which is actionless, in one’s own Self, ‘sarvaiã adhyastaë’ – all of this karma is
super-imposed.
What is the nature of this imposition? It is the experience ‘I am doing.’ ‘I
am doing this.’ That is indeed the experience of the karma yogi. That why
Éaåkara says that the karma yogi is an Ajñàni. That is why it says that the
karma yogi has the feeling of doer-ship. Thus, in everyone, this is superimposed. ‘Paåáitaã api’ – then what? Even paåáits, those with discrimination,
what do they say? ‘Ahaë karomi iti manyate’ – he thinks, ‘I am acting.’ That is
what a person thinks.

‘Paévàdibhiéca viéeçàt’ – we discussed this matter in detail in the classes
for Brahma Sutras. Thus, even a person with discrimination goes and thinks
this. This feeling happens within. What is that? ‘I did this.’ This experience
happens spontaneously. That isn’t just speaking about pride. This is speaking
about an experience that is shared everywhere. This isn’t relevant to whether a
person is proud or not. This experience enters inside everyone, unknowingly.
This is ‘I did this. We can understand that Ajñànis feel this. However, it says
that this enters even into Vivekis.
‘Atah àtmasamavetatayà sarvalokaprasiddhe karmaåi nadìkùlastheçu iva
väkçeçu gatipràtilomyena akarma karmàbhàvaë yathàbhùtaë gatyabhàvamiva
väkçeçu yaã paéyet.’ So what is needed? ‘Ataã, àtma samavetatayà’ – being
joined with oneself.. whoever is thinking about the Àtman, about karma, about
the absence of karma, about karma tyàga and karma yoga, for that person who
thinks, being joined with him.. Who is thinking? It is this jiva. That is the one
who speaks and hears. Along with him, with all jivas.. ‘ samavetatayà,’ means
something that is connected in a way that cannot be separated. A person
cannot separate from that. ‘This is my karma.’ A person cannot become
separated from that. ‘I, all of this is imagined in me.’ In this way, it isn’t
possible to separate.
In that way, this is merged together. ‘Sarvalokaprasiddhe,’ the experience
of all jivas.. the word ‘prasiddha’ means ‘experience’ here. That isn’t the word
‘prasiddha’ as used in Malayalam. This experience of all jivas, what is that?
‘Karma’ – without being able to separate from that, or without being able to
avoid identifying with that, this is the experience of everyone. This is the
experience in all times and places, this ‘karma.’
What is that? ‘nadìkùlastheçu iva väkçeçu gati’ – in the way that the trees
on the shore appear to be traveling when one is on a boat, ‘pràtilomyena’ they
appear to be going in the opposite direction. In that way, ‘akarma
karmàbhàvaë’ – one must see the absence of karma. That is seen through
viveka. ‘Yathàbhùtaë’ – that is the Truth. That is the Paramàätha, the Supreme
Truth. ‘Gatyabhàvam iva väkçeçu,’ – in the same way that those trees appear to
be traveling fast, the person grasps with viveka that those really aren’t moving.
That is an appearance. That is the difference.

When that tree appears to be moving fast, as the vehicle is going forward,
if it is a child, he believes it to be true. He will look at that with wonder. ‘How
are these traveling?’ The child isn’t able to recognize about this traveling, that
they really aren’t moving. If one is traveling, a child may have this doubt for a
moment. However, what if one is a viveki? One instantly recognizes, ‘this is an
experience, but it isn’t true.’
Thus, he only sees that as an experience. That is ‘gatyabhàvamiva
väkçeçu.’ An old person will say, ‘the movement of those trees is really not
movement.’ He sees that there is no movement. Likewise, ‘ yaã paéyet’ – the
karma yogi sees like that. A sanyassi, a true sanyassi sees that. A person with
viveka sees this. What is that? While I perform these actions, with skill,
enthusiasm, and interest, none of this is within me.’ He sees this. That is
karma yoga.
The Gita says, ‘yoga karmasu kauéalam.’ Otherwise, if one performs
karma with skill, in the proper way, with out failing, without any shortcomings’
– none of this is called ‘karma yoga.’ We can call those karmas as great. That is
an external greatness about the karma. That is necessary for karma. However,
none of that is karma yoga. That is what we should recognize. If we perform
karma without faltering, in the morning till night, that doesn’t make it karma
yoga.
If nobody is able to find any fault with our karma, if there is that much
perfection, that doesn’t make it karma yoga. If we perform karma with great
éraddhà and one-pointedness, avoiding any faults in the karma, just that
doesn’t make it karma yoga. That is a great karma, definitely. That is a karma
that should be well-received. However, who is the karma yogi? ‘Yaã paéyet’ –
the karma yogi is one who while performing this karma in such a great way,
indentifies with the truth internally, that ‘In truth, there is no karma within
me.’ That is karma yoga. That is said ‘yoga karmasu kauéalam.’
There the commentator said, ‘that is the capacity to change the very
nature of karma as binding the jiva.’ That is what we should understand karma
yoga as. That is also what we should make others understand. Otherwise, this
doesn’t mean cleverness in the karma. ‘Karmasu kauéalam’ doesn’t mean a
person who is externally clever in karma, like how the world thinks. That isn’t

karma yoga. There, it’s enough to say that someone is clever in karma. That is
skill. However, that isn’t karma yoga.
What is karma yoga? That is an internal attitude that is always within the
karma yogi. That is karma yoga. That is the center of karma yoga. That isn’t an
action connected to the external karma. That is individual’s view of karma.
That is karma yoga. This is Yoga in karma. The Gita also says, ‘ samatvaë yoga
ucyate.’ We made this clear in that section. Therefore, we should never
misunderstand what a karma yogi is. If you haven’t told this correctly to
anyone, no problem. However, don’t go and make others believe this in the
wrong way. That why this is said here.
‘Yaã paéyet akarmaåi ca,’ – thus, the Yogi must also see karma in akarma.
When this is said, we should understand this clearly. If you go an ask a ‘karma
yogi’ when he wakes up from sleep in the morning, ‘what is karma yoga? What
is it to see ‘akarma’ in ‘karma’? he won’t be able to answer. Why is that? It is
because only a person who practices this can say that.
Most people, after hearing this, sentence 55.00 Why is that? It is because
they just hear. They don’t bring that into their own practice. If one brings this
into one’s own practice, then you can’t forget it. Then it is difficult to forget.
Then it isn’t difficult to remember. Then why does it become difficult to
remember? It is because we just hear. That doesn’t become imbibed in the
mind. That doesn’t become connected to one’s life.
After one hears this, ones hearing will be one things, and action another.
Therefore, to not forget this is the practice of this. If this is a part of your life,
then you can never forget it. If anyone has a doubt about this, you will be able
to remove that doubt. Like that, however the Yogi sees akarma in karma,
‘akarmaåi ca,’ in akarma as well, ‘kàryakaraåavyàpàra uparame’ – this is
‘relaxation,’ the relaxation of the body, relaxation of mind, of the senses.. this is
the relaxation that we normally experience. This means to not do any action.
That pleasure, is ‘kàryakaraåavyàpàra uparamam.’ This is the pleasure we
experience through not doing any karma. This is the sukham that everyone
desires.
In that also, what does he do? In that, ‘karmavat àtmani adhyàropite,’
what does he recognize through discrimination? That is also in the place of

karma. However, he imagined karma within himself, however he super-imposed
that, he thinks, ‘I am not doing anything.’ In the same way, another
imagination is ‘I am not doing. I am happy. There is no action in me. I
renounce. Now I have nothing to do. What karma is there for sanyassa? Isn’t a
sanyassi someone who renounces everything? Then who is there to request a
sanyassi to do karma?’ Thinking like this, he feels pleasure, mentally.
Therefore, ‘karmavat àtmani adhyàopite’ – that is a backwards delusion.
That is backwards knowledge, delusion. There is no difference between this
and karma. These two are one and the same. The commentator says here, ‘that
kind of karma tyàga and that pleasure of not performing karma are karma
indeed!’ ‘Tùçåìë akurvan sukhaë àse’ – this is how his experience is. ‘I
renounce everything. Now I am at ease.’ Some people say this, ‘now that I have
renounce everything, I am at ease.’
Don’t some people say, ‘I’m not able to be at ease in the àéram, because I
don’t get any time. I don’t get any chance for that. This is karma yoga here.
What I desire is to be at ease.’ Some people have asked me, ‘is there any àéram
where I can just be at ease?’ I’m not merely saying this. Someone asked me this
recently. ‘Is there an àéram where I can be at ease for six months?’ I said,
‘what’s wrong with here? Let me teach what being at ease is. I will make you be
at ease for the whole six months.’ However, he won’t stay. Why? There is a
problem. Thus, everyone looks for a place to be at ease. What is that?
‘Tùçåìë akurvan sukham àse’ – this is to do nothing, being happy.
When one is happy, if one gets food at the correct time, they will be at more
ease. And if the food is very tasty, then what to say? In that way, a person
desires to sit happily. That is what many people say. ‘I had so many karmas
and pràrabdha in the house. I renounced all of that and came to the àéram. I
renounced all of that and came here. But after coming here, it is the same thing
as before.’ This is ‘karma,’ work.’ Then he says, ‘I can’t get any mental peace
here.’ I came here for relaxation. That is what is said here, ‘tùçåìm akurvan
sukhaë àse.’ This is to do nothing and sit happily, without a single action.
Then one needs servants all around one. They should give whatever I want.
That is ‘sanyassa.’ ‘Ityahaëkàra abhisaëdhihetutvàt’ – what is this? This
is attachment, along with ego. This is a strong connection. That jiva has a

strong bondage to the ahaëkàra, the ego. That is why he is interested in this
‘tùçåìë akurvan sukham àse’ – ‘I am at ease.’ The jiva becomes firmly bound
to the ego. In the way that one becomes bound to these external and gross
karmas. Such a person becomes bound to this pleasure, to this sanyassa. That
is said, ‘ahaëkàra abhisaëdhihetutvàt’ – the cause of this is Ajñàna,
Ignorance. It is Ahanta, the ego.
‘Tasmin akarmaåi,’ in this pleasure, in this ‘akarma,’ ‘karma yaã paéyet,’
whoever recognizes that this is also karma.. For the karma yogi, there is no
difference between that and this. For the karma yogi, the performance of karma
and this karma sanyassa have no difference at all. For such a viveki, ‘yaã evaë
karma akarma vibhàgajñaã,’ he who knows the difference between karma and
akarma, he who recognizes this difference.. ‘saã buddhimàn’ – he should be
called ‘Wise.’ Otherwise, this doesn’t mean someone who considers and plans
intelligently in performing karma and executes with skill. This doesn’t mean a
person who performs all karmas that bear fruit.
Who do we call ‘buddhimàn,’ or ‘intelligent’? It is a person who carefully
plans and performs the karma fruitfully. That is who we call ‘intelligent.’ That
not this ‘buddhimàn.’ This means a person who knows the secret of karma.
‘Paåáitaã’ – he is a true Pandit. We said before, ‘paåáitopi ahaëkaromi iti
manyate’ – it said that even paåáits have the experience ‘I am doing.’ When it
uses the word ‘paåáit’ for a second time, this means, ‘a true paåáit,’
‘manuçyeçu,’ only such a person is a ‘paåáit’ among men.
In the beginning of the bhàçya, it said, ‘paåáà àtma viçayà buddhiã
yeçàë te paåáitàã.’ That word will be used later also. ‘Tam àhu paåáitaë
buddhàã’ – the Gita says, ‘he is called a paåáit,’ among men. ‘Sa yuktaã yogì’
– that is a Yogi. That is who is called a ‘yogi’ in the Gita. Otherwise, a ‘yogi’
here doesn’t mean someone sitting in Padmàsana. The ‘yogi’ here doesn’t
mean a person standing in some special posture. ‘Sa yuktaã’ – one with Yoga is
a Yogi. What does ‘yuktaã’ means? This means one who has Yoga. The one
with Yoga is the Yogi. Otherwise, a person doesn’t have to twist and stretch his
arms and legs to have Yoga. That is good. That is good for the body. However,
that isn’t necessary for the Yoga said in the Gita.

Yoga should be in the mind, not in the muscle. What we teach people is
muscle Yoga. Here, it says about Yoga for the mind. ‘Sa yuktaã yogi,’ he is a
Yogi. ‘Kätsna karma kät ca’ – what is the specialty about him? He is ‘kätsna
karma kät.’ We explained this word before, ‘tasya kàryaë na vidyate.’ ‘He has
nothing left to do. He has done all that needed to be done.’ That is ‘kätsna
karma kät.’ ‘He has done all karmas.’
We said before, ‘kië karma kimakarmeti kavayopyatra mohitàã’ – ‘What
is karma? What is akarma?’ This Yogi has no delusion about that. He has
recognized both of these. What does he do? ‘Sa aéubhàt mokçitaã’ – we said
before what ‘aéubha’ is. That is samsàra. Thus, he has become released from
that. In this way, he becomes freed from that karma. ‘Kätyakätyo bhavati’ – he
becomes ‘kätyakätya’ – one who has done all that needed to be done. Then he
has no svadharma.
In the perfection of the performance of karma, what does the karma yogi
do? He becomes devoid of svadharma. He becomes devoid of karma. That is
how he becomes ‘kätyakätya.’ Then there is no difference in what is called a
‘karma yogi,’ or a ‘bhaktan,’ or a ‘Jñàni.’ We will discuss later about bhaktas. It
is just that that is coming. Here, we are dealing with a karma yogi. The other
will come. We can wait. ‘Kätyakätyo bhavati.’ He becomes content.
Next, it says in the bhàçya, ‘ayaë élokaã anyathà vyàkhyàtaã kaiçcit’ –
normally, the Pùrva Pakça will come first in the bhàçya. Then the Siddhànta
will come. Here, it isn’t like that. First, the Siddhànti came, and after, the Pùrva
Pakça comes. Here, we have understood the matter. For that purpose, the
Siddhànti was said first. Then Éaåkara shows how Vättikàran and others have
commented on this.
It is good for us to understand this Pùrva Pakça. Why is that? It is because
what most people talk and spread.. this isn’t everybody, but many people are
spreading these Pùrva Pakças, not the Siddhànta. Therefore, after studying the
Pùrva Pakças, we will understand this when we hear. This will help to avoid
this from happening to us. This is because what the mind can easily be
attracted to is the Pùrva Pakça, not the Siddhànta. For the Siddhànta, we said
before, ‘durvijñeyatvam’ – that is difficult to grasp. Thus, what immediately is

accepted in gross-minded people are these Pùrva Pakças. That is why they turn
that into a Siddhànta and spread those teachings.
There is a philosophy called the ‘càrvàkas.’ The ideas of that group
immediately spread through the world. Because the ideas of that philosophy
were so quickly spread, it is called ‘càr vàkas.’ This means ‘pleasing words.’
Otherwise, Càrvàkas doesn’t just mean an ‘atheist,’ someone who doesn’t
believe in God. Whosever ideas became so quickly spread in the world, they are
called ‘Càrvàkas.’ Thus, the ideas in these Pùrva Pakça quickly spread among
people. Only a few amount of people accepted the Siddhànti here. Only a few
people put that into practice. Therefore, it is good for us to understand these
Pùrva Pakças.
‘Ayaë élokaã anyathà vyàkhyàtaã kaiécit’ – some people say other than
this. The commentator doesn’t give the name of these people, because they
don’t deserve to be given a name. That’s why it just says ‘ kaiécit,’ by some.’
Why should he give them more ‘publicity,’ more spreading by giving a name?
That is why. ‘Kathaë,’ how is that?
‘Nityànàë kila karmaåàë ìévaràrthe anuçâhìyamàåànàë tatphalàbhàvàt
akarmàåi tàni ucyante gauåyàvättyà.’ It says, ‘nityànàë karmaåàë,’ our nitya
karmas, in other words, the normal karmas we perform.. the karmas considered
to be ‘nitya karmas’ in those days were the nitya agnihotra and other karmas
that are ordained in the Vedas and Smätis. For such karmas, ‘ìévaràäthe
anuçâhìyamàåànàë,’ what do they do? They perform those as an offering for
the Lord. ‘Tatphalàbhàvàt’ – it says that these karmas have no fruit. This
philsophy says that the éàstras say that there is no fruit for nitya karmas.
‘Akarmaåi’ – because these have no fruit, they should be called ‘akarma.’
‘Gauåyàvättyà’ – this is not the primary meaning. This is the ‘gauåa’ meaning,
or secondary meaning.
In the primary meaning, ‘karma’ should only be called ‘karma.’ However,
because these karmas don’t give any fruit, they can be called ‘akarma.’ Teçàë
ca akaraåaë akarma’ – the non-performance of such karmas as well can be
called ‘akarma.’ ‘Tacca pratyavàyaphalatvàt karma ucyate gauåa eva vättyà.’ If
one doesn’t do those, there will be a fruit. If one doesn’t perform nitya karmas,
what will happen? That will cause a person to live in hell, ‘ naraka,’ after death.

That is the siddhànta of one group of followers of Pùrva Mìmàmsa. They say,
‘if one performs the nitya karmas, then there is no particular fruit from those.
However, if one doesn’t perform those, there is a fruit. That is hell.’ That is
what is said here. ‘Tat ca pratyavàyaphalatvàt karma ucyate,’ if one doesn’t
perform that, that will produce the fruit of ‘pratyavàya,’ or hell. Therefore, for
that, ‘karma ucyate.’
Thus, it said that nitya karmas are ‘akarma.’ However, if one doesn’t
performs those, it will give the fruit of hell. Therefore, that can be called
‘karma’ in that case. How is that? ‘Gauåyà eva vättyà.’ That isn’t in the primary
meaning. ‘Tatra nitye karmaåi akarma yaã paéyet phalàbhàvàt’ – therefore,
what does it say? It says to see ‘akarma’ in ‘nitya karma.’ Why? It is because that
doesn’t give a fruit. That is why you can see that as ‘akarma.’ See ‘nitya karma’
as ‘akarma.’ In that way, perform those. Because that has no fruit, it can be
called ‘akarma.’
‘Yathà dhenurapi gauã agauã ityucyate kçìràkhyaë phalaë na
prayacchati iti tadvat.’ It says, ‘dhenur api,’ for a cow.. There is a specific
meaning for ‘dhenu.’ It is said, ‘nava prasùta goã.’ This normally means ‘cow.’
However, this means a cow that is just born, ‘dhenu.’ When it is just born, a
cow is called ‘dhenu.’ For that, ‘kçìràkhyaë phalaë na prayacchati’ – that
cannot give milk. The cow was just born, but it has no milk. Because it has no
milk, what is said? Then we say, ‘this isn’t a cow.’ Just like that.. In other
words, because that has no milk, some people say, ‘that’s not a cow.’
This is because if it is a cow, it must give milk. However, this doesn’t give
milk. Therefore, that doesn’t deserve to be called ‘cow.’ To refute that, it says,
‘agoã.’ That means that this cow isn’t a cow. Likewise, we can say ‘nitya karmas
are not karma.’ Therefore, they are called ‘akarma.’ So the éloka says,
‘karmaåyakarma yaã paéyet.’ Here, this ‘akarma’ is the ‘nitya karmas.’ ‘Tathà
nityàkaraåe tu akarmaåi ca karma yaã paéyet’ – like that, if one doesn’t perform
the nitya karmas, what happens? That is seen as karma. Why is that?
‘Narakàdiprayavàyaphalaë prayacchati iti’ – if one doesn’t perform these, that
will cause birth in hell. That is what the followers of Pùrva Mìmàmsa say. They
say, ‘everyone must perform nitya karmas.’ That is said, ‘yàvàjjivaë agnihotram
juhùyàt’ – one should perform the agnihotra till death, constantly.

‘Karmaåi akarma’ – what does it mean to see ‘akarma’ in ‘karma’? That
means that the nitya karmas are ‘akarma,’ because they don’t give any fruit.
Then, ‘akarmaåi ca karma yaã’ – and what if one doesn’t perform that?
‘Nityàkaraåe’ – that becomes karma. How? It is because it gives the fruit of hell.
That is said, ‘nityàkaraåe tu akarmaåi’ – that is ‘akarma.’ ‘Karma yaã paéyet,’
one should see this as karma. Why? It says, ‘narakàdipratyavàyaphalaë’ – it is
because that gives the fruit of hell, etc. That is how this is commented on.
In other words, when the éloka says, ‘karmaåi akarma,’ and ‘akarmaåi
karma,’ this commentary connects these to nitya karmas. This means that
according to this meaning, one must simply perform nitya karmas, always. If
one doesn’t perform that karma, that will give the fruit of birth in hell. That is
how they comment on this éloka, in order to prove their Siddhànta.
‘Na etat yuktaë vyàkhyànaë’ – this commentary is not right.’ In this way,
‘evaë jñànàt aéubhàt mokçànupapatteã’ – Éaåkara says, ‘this kind of
knowledge will never liberate you from Samsàra. ‘Yat jñàtvà mokçase éubhàt’ iti
bhagavaâ uktaë vacanaë bàdhyate’ – what did the Lord say? He said that one
who accepts this knowledge becomes liberated from Samsàra. For that,
‘bàdhyate,’ that would become wrong if the éloka is commented on in this way.
That would give the opposite fruit.
‘Kathaë,’ how is that? ‘Nityànàm anuçâhànàt aéubhàt syàt nàma
mokçaåaë, na tu teçàë phalàbhàvajñànàt.’ If you want, you can think that
way. How is that? If one performs nitya karmas as an offering to God, he can
become free from samsàra. If you want, even if we partially accept your
Siddhànta, ‘na tu teçàë phalàbhàvajñànàt’ – from knowing that nitya karmas
have no fruit, a person can never become freed from samsàra. Therefore, that
commentary is not correct. That is said, ‘nityànàë phalàbhàvajñànaë
aéubhamuktiphalatvena coditaë, nityakarmajñànaë và.’ Then what?
Therefore, the knowledge from the Vedas that nitya karmas have no fruit
can never liberate you from Samsàra. That was never ordained in the Vedas. It
has never been ordained in the Vedas, ‘a person can become liberated by
knowledge about nitya karmas.’ ‘Na ca bhagavataiva iha uktaë’ – the Lord has
not said any such thing that is not said in the Vedas. ‘Etena akarmaåi
karmadaréanam pratyuktaë’ – therefore, this explanation of seeing akarma in

karma has been refuted. They said, ‘if one doesn’t perform nitya karmas, that
will give the fruit of hell. Therefore, seeing that is seeing akarma in karma.’
This idea has been refuted. ‘Na hi akarmaåi ‘karma’ iti darénam kartavyatayà
iha codyate’ Then what? It says, ‘one sees karma in akarma.’ There, ‘nitya
karmas’ are akarma. The idea that this éloka ordains this view is false. That is
‘na kartavyatayà iha codyate.’
However, what if we think like this; ‘nityasya tu kartavyatàmàtram?’
Suppose this means that these nitya karmas that are ordained in the Vedas
must be performed, by one who is an adhikàri. ‘Na ca akaraåàt nityasya
pratyavàyo bhavati’ iti vijñànàt kiñcit phalaë syàt’ – the Siddhànti says that
there is nothing special gained from knowing that the fruit of the nonperformance of nitya karmas is hell. In this way, the Siddhànti is refuting the
ideas of the Pùrva Pakça.
‘Nàpi nityàkaraåaë jñeyatvena coditaë’ – it says that the Vedas have
never ordained that a person must know about the non-performance of nitya
karmas. Therefore, that is also not what the Lord says here. In other words, it is
saying that it isn’t possible to connect the meaning of this éloka in any way to
nitya karmas. ‘Nàpi ‘karma akarma’ iti mithyàdaréanàt aéubhàt mokçaåaë’ –
you also cannot say that the mistaken knowledge that karma is akarma can
cause liberation from samsàra. If you said that, ‘buddhimatvaë,’ that wouldn’t
indicate any kind of wisdom in the Yogi. ‘Yuktatà’ – the Lord said before, ‘sa
yuktaã kätsna karma kät.’ Because all of these parts, ‘phalaë upapadyate’ –
then this wouldn’t be correct.
The reason is because the Lord said that one who understands this éloka
is ‘buddhimàn,’ a wise person. The Lord also said that he is a Yogi. He is also
‘kätsna karma kät,’ one who has done everything needed to be done. If all of
those must be connected, what must happen? Then you cannot comment on
this éloka being connected to nitya karmas. ‘Stutir và’ – this is also not the
‘stuti,’ or praise of nitya karmas.
‘Mithyàjñànameva hi sàkçàt aéubharùpaë kutaã anyasmàd aéubhàt
mokçaåaë?’ Therefore, what is it? The Siddhànti says that this ‘ aéubham,’ or
samsàra in truth is Ajñàna, ignorance. That is ‘mithyàjñàna,’ false knowledge.
That is backwards knowledge, ‘bhranti,’ or confusion. That is ‘aéubham.’

‘Kutaã anyasmàd aéubhàt mokçaåaë?’ It says, ‘is there any other kind of
‘aéubham’ from which the jiva must attain Mokça? ‘Na hi tamaã tamaso
nivartakaë bhavati’ – it says, ‘darkness can never remove darkness.’ The Vedas
do not instruct some other Ajñàna, or some other confusion to destroy this
Ajñàna here. That is also not what the Lord instructs. Therefore, there is no
fruit in connecting these words with nitya karmas. Therefore, this
interpretation, of seeing akarma in karma, and karma in akarma, all of this
explanation is never connected to the meaning of the Vedas, or the Lord’s
instruction. Therefore, it isn’t possible to accept such commentaries. What is
said here is the correct explanation.’ We will continue this section later. For
now we can end our discussion.
AUM AMRITESHVARYAI NAMAH

